**Chapter 6**

# Comparative and Superlative Adjectives

Only qualitative adjectives can have a superlative or comparative form.
If an English adjective can be used comparatively or superlatively, the
equivalent Belarusian adjective most likely can as well. By the same
token, if the English adjective cannot be used comparatively or
superlatively, the Belarusian adjective probably cannot also.

6.1Short comparative adjective formation

The short comparative form of an adjective is identical to the
comparative adverb. The comparative adverb is formed by removing the
final –**ы** or –**і** and replacing it with an accented –**ей**. See
**29.4** for more on the comparative adverb.

б*е*дны*poor*бядн*е*й*poorer*

б*е*лы*white*бял*е*й*whiter*

**в*а*жны*important*важн*е*й*more important*

**вольны*free*вальней*more free*

**вяс*ё*лы*fun*весял*е*й*more fun*

**дакл*а*дны*precise*дакладн*е*й*more precise*

р*а*нні*early*ран*е*й*earlier*

If the last consonant of the adjective is invariably non-palatized, the
final –**ы** is replaced with –**эй**.

м*у*дры*wise*мудр*э*й*wiser*

прыг*о*жы*beautiful*прыгаж*э*й*more beautiful*

х*і*тры*cunning*хітр*э*й*more cunning*

For adjectives ending in –**ты** or –**ды**, the ending is removed and
replaced with one of the accented endings –**цей** or –**дзей**
respectively.

баг*а*ты*rich*багац*е*й*richer*

**густ*ыthick, viscous*гусц*е*й*thicker, more viscous*

ж*о*ўты*yellow*жаўц*е*й*more yellow*

**малад*ыyoung*маладз*е*й*younger*

**пр*о*сты*simple*прасц*е*й*simpler*

**т*о*ўсты*thick, fat*таўсц*е*й*thicker, fatter*

цв*ё*рды*hard, firm*цвярдз*е*й*harder, firmer*

**ч*ы*сты*clean*чысц*е*й*cleaner*

**There are a number of irregular comparative adjectives.

выс*о*кі*high*выш*е*й*higher*

**глыб*о*кі*deep*глыб*е*й*deeper*

дал*ё*кі*far*дал*е*й*farther*

шыр*о*кі*wide*шыр*э*й*wider*

бл*і*зкі*near*бліж*э*й*nearer*

**в*у*зкі*narrow*вуж*э*й*narrower*

гл*а*дкі*smooth*гладз*е*й*smoother*

кар*о*ткі*short*карац*е*й*shorter*

**сал*о*дкі*sweet*саладз*е*й*sweeter*

глух*іdeaf*глуш*э*й*deafer*

**дараг*іexpensive*дараж*э*й*more expensive*

**д*о*ўгі*long*даўж*э*й*longer*

**л*ё*гкі*light*лягч*э*й*lighter*

**м*я*ккі*soft*мякч*э*й*softer*

ц*і*хі*quiet*ціш*э*й*quieter*

х*у*ткі*fast*хутч*э*й*faster*

6.2Short comparative adverb usage

Because short comparative adjectives are adverbs, they do not decline
and can only be used predicatively.

Я маладз*е*й за яг*о*.*I am younger than him.*

К*о*жнаму хац*е*лася стаць бліж*э*й*Each wanted to get closer to the
water.*

да вад*ы*.

6.3Irregular short comparative adjectives

A small number of adjectives have unique short comparative adjective
forms, separate from their short comparative adverb form. These
adjectives all end in –**шы**, decline like other adjectives, and are
not limited to predicate usage.

вял*і*кі*big*б*о*льшы*bigger*

д*о*бры*good*л*е*пшы*better*

**др*э*нны*bad*г*о*ршы*worse*

мал*ыsmall*м*е*ншы*smaller*

Some examples of usage of short comparative adjectives are given.

Сам быў не ў л*е*пшым ст*а*не.*I myself was not in any better shape.*

Там был*і* ябл*ы*кі б*о*лшыя,*The apples were bigger over there*

чым тут.*than here.*

**The adjective малад*ы*, *young*, has the normal short comparative form
маладз*е*й, but it also has an additional short comparative form
мал*о*дшы, which has the specialized meaning of junior. The
adjective ст*а*ры does not have a normal short comparative form, but
there is the specialized word ст*а*ршы, which means *older*, or
*senior*. Both мал*о*дшы and ст*а*ршы are used like any normal
adjective.

Мал*о*дшы лейтэн*а*нт камандав*а*ў*The junior lieutenant commanded*

мінам*ё*тнай р*о*тай.*the mortar company.*

Апр*о*ч мян*е* был*а* ў м*а*ці яшч*эMy mother had another daughter
besides*

дачк*а*, ма*я* сястр*а* ст*а*ршая.*me, my older sister.*

6.4Long comparative adjectives

Adjectives that do not have a short comparative form can be used
comparatively by placing either больш, *more*, or менш, *less*, before
the word.

Я больш паліт*ы*чны, чым вы*I am more tactful than both of*

р*а*зам уз*я*тыя.*you combined.*

**Бераж*о*к ля *я*мы стаў больш*The rim around the hole became*

зр*у*чны.*more convenient.*

6.5Superlatives ending in –**ейшы** or –**эйшы**

Any adjective which has a short comparative form can form a superlative
by appending the ending –**шы** to that short comparative form.
Adjectives without a short comparative form that ends in –**ей** or
–**эй** do not have a unique superlative form. 

бядн*е*й*poorer*бядн*е*йшы*poorest*

**бял*е*й*whiter*бял*е*йшы*whitest*

дараж*э*й*more expensive*дараж*э*йшы*most expensive*

**карац*е*й*shorter*карац*е*йшы*shortest*

мякч*э*й*softer*мякч*э*йшы*softest*

ран*е*й*earlier*ран*е*йшы*earliest*

The adjective ст*а*ры, *old*, has no short comparative form, but does
have the superlative стар*э*йшы, *oldest*.

6.6 Superlatives using the adverb с*а*мы

The superlative form of any qualitative adjective can be formed by
placing the adjective с*а*мы, *most*, before the adjective and by then
declining с*а*мы to agree with the adjective. This is the form used for
adjectives that do not have a superlative form ending in –**ейшы** or
–**эйшы**, like the adjectives discussed in **Section 6.3**.

Ян*ы* ста*я*лі п*е*рад с*а*мым крут*ы*м*They stood in front of the
steepest hill.*

узг*о*ркам.

А ўв*о*гуле р*о*зум — не с*а*мае*Generally, the mind is not the most*

гал*о*ўнае ў чалав*е*ку.*important thing to a person.*

6.8Superlatives with the prefix **най**-

This prefix can be appended to ordinary superlatives, the comparative
adjectives mentioned in **Section 6.3**, or to adjectives that normally
has no special superlative form. The prefix **най**- slightly changes
the meaning of the word. A normal superlative indicates that the
characteristic of the noun is the extreme when compared to others. When
the prefix **най**- is appended, the meaning indicates that the
characteristic of the adjective is extreme, regardless of whether it is
compared to others or not.

**Г*э*та — найб*о*льшы знак для*This is a really big sign for the town
that*

**гарадк*а*, што з*а*ўтра вайн*а*.*war is tomorrow.*

**Г*э*тую дав*е*дку, бы найдараж*э*йшы*She buried this affidavit in the
papers, as*

дакум*е*нт, яна загарн*у*ла ў*if it were a most valuable document.*

пап*е*рку.

**Я кал*і*сьці б*у*ду найп*е*ршы.*Someday I will be the very first.*

##### Chapter 7

# Personal Pronouns

7.1Personal pronouns

1<sup>st</sup> Pers. Sing.2<sup>nd</sup> Pers. Sing.1<sup>st</sup> Pers.
Pl.2<sup>nd</sup> Pers. Pl.

Nom.ятымывы

Acc.мян*е*цяб*е*насвас

Gen.мян*е*цяб*е*насвас

Dat.мнетаб*е*намвам

Instr.мной\*таб*о*й\*н*а*мів*а*мі

Prep.аба мнеаб таб*е*аб насаб вас

3<sup>rd</sup> Pers. Masc.3<sup>rd</sup> Pers. Neut.3<sup>rd</sup> Pers.
Fem.3<sup>rd</sup> Pers. Pl.

Nom.ёнян*о*ян*а*ян*ы*

Acc.яг*о*яг*о*я*е*іх

Gen.яг*о*яг*о*я*е*іх

Dat.ям*у*ям*у*ёйім

Instr.імімёй\**і*мі

Prep.аб імаб імаб ёйаб іх

7.2The reflexive personal pronoun

The reflexive pronoun is a direct synonym for the subject of the
sentence. This means that it cannot be the subject of a sentence and
does not have a nominative form. This pronoun is used when the subject
of the sentence is also some other part of the sentence, such as the
direct or indirect object.

Acc.сяб*е*

Gen.сяб*е*

Dat.саб*е*

Instr.саб*о*й\*

Prep.аб саб*е*

\*The variations мн*о*ю, таб*о*ю, *ё*ю, and саб*о*ю are very common, but
are non-standard and should be avoided by the non-native speaker. See
**3.5** for how this variation effects nouns.

7.3The pronoun сам

This pronoun is used to emphasize part of the sentence, either the
subject, an object, or indirect object. When not used with the subject
of the sentence, the pronoun сам simply imparts emphasis and is not
actually translated. When used with the subject of the sentence,
however, its meaning can be roughly translated as *myself*, *yourself*,
*himself*, etc... The pronoun сам is used like an adjective, matching
the case and gender of the noun it describes.

Masc.Neut.Fem.Pl.

Nom.самсам*о*сам*а*с*а*мі

Acc.сам (-*о*га)сам*о*сам*у*с*а*мі (-іх)

Gen.сам*о*гасам*о*гасам*о*йс*а*міх

Dat.сам*о*мусам*о*мусам*о*йс*а*мім

Instr.сам*і*мсам*і*мсам*о*йс*а*мімі

Prep.аб сам*і*маб сам*і*маб сам*о*йаб с*а*міх

Ён в*ы*рашыў сам прыйсц*і*.*He decided to come himself.*

Адн*о*йчы нав*а*т в*ы*ратаваў сам*уOnce he even rescued the queen.*

карал*е*ву.

Ал*е* гавар*ы*ў ён т*о*лькі з с*а*мімі*But he only spoke with the
neighbors.*

сус*е*дзьмі.

##### Chapter 16

# Present and Future Tenses

Belarusian verbal aspect is similar to Russian and Ukrainian. Consult a
text on one of these languages for more information on verbal aspect.

16.1Present tense

Belarusian has one present tense and two future tenses, the future
perfect and the future imperfect. The present tense is formed by
conjugating the infinitive of the imperfect aspect of a verb for the
correct person.

Я тут жыв*у*.*I live here.*

Я жыв*у* цяп*е*р у сябр*о*ў.*I am living with friends right now.*

Я жыв*у* з *і*мі м*е*сяц.*I have lived with them for a month.*

**The verb быць, *to be*, has no present tense conjugation. The verb *to
be* is often rendered in the present tense as a pause, represented as a
dash when written. It is dropped completely in third person impersonal
constructions. Some of the functions of the verb *to be* can also be
filled by other verbs like быв*а*ць, *to occur*, and стаць, *to become*.

Я — амерык*а*нец, а ты — белар*у*с.*I am an american, and you are a
belarusian.*

Хл*о*пчык — в*е*льмі гал*о*дны.*The young man is very hungry.*

Ц*я*жка в*ы*вучыць н*о*вую м*о*ву.*It is difficult to learn a new
language.*

The word ёсць is also used to fulfill some of the functions of the verb
*to be*. It is used either to emphasis the existence of the subject, or
as a predicate meaning *there is*. The word ёсць is etymologically
descended from the obsolete present tense conjugation of the Common
Slavonic verb byti, *to be*.

Ён з’яв*і*ўся так*і*м, як*і*м ён і ёсць*He appeared as that person, whom
he is*

па сва*ё*й нат*у*ры.*by his nature.*

**Ёсць як*і*-н*е*будзь ст*а*ры, што да*Is there anyone old that lived
here*

вайн*ы* тут жыў?*before the war?*

16.2Future imperfect formation

The future imperfect tense is formed by conjugating the verb быць for
the correct person, and following that with the infinitive of a verb’s
imperfective aspect.

Што б*у*дзеш раб*і*ць?*What will you be doing?*

Я б*у*ду мн*о*га чыт*а*ць.*I will be reading a lot.*

16.3Future perfect formation

The future perfect tense is formed by conjugating the infinitive of a
verb’s perfective aspect for the correct person.

Што зр*о*біш?*What will you do?*

Я ск*о*нчу г*э*ту кн*і*гу.*I will finish this book.*

##### Chapter 23

# The Genitive Case

23.1Use of the genitive case

This case is used both by certain prepositions and also to express
ownership and relationship. Some verbs, like ба*я*цца, *to fear*, and
хац*е*ць, *to want*, require that the direct object be placed in the
genitive case. To negate a sentence, the particle не is placed before
the direct object, and the direct object is placed in the genitive case.
A lack of something can be expressed by the word ням*а*, followed by the
noun in the genitive plural, or genitive singular if the noun has no
plural form.

Расл*і*ны ба*я*цца мар*о*зу.*Plants fear frost.*

Я сам*а* г*э*тага хац*е*ла.*I wanted this myself.*

**Невяд*о*ма, хто гаспад*а*р г*э*тага*Noone knows who the owner of this*

кат*э*джа.*cottage is.*

Я не м*а*ю ч*а*су.*I do not have any time.*

Я ніч*о*га не разум*е*ю.*I do not understand anything.*

Шкада, але і ў мяне нічога няма.*It is sad, but I do not have anything
either.*

23.2Prepositions with the genitive case

The following prepositions can be followed by the genitive case. The
meaning of each preposition in that context is given.

ад*from*

Ад сасн*ы* адлам*а*лася гал*і*нка.*A branch broke off from the tree.*

Схав*а*ліся ад даждж*у*.*They hid from the rain.*

Ад вясн*ы* да в*о*сені.*From spring to fall.*

*than*

Мацн*е*й ад гр*о*му.*Stronger than thunder.*

акрам*яbut*

**Там нік*о*га не был*оNo one was there*

акрам*я* мян*е*.*but me.*

апрач*аbut*

**Там нік*о*га не был*оNo one was there*

апрач*а* мян*е*.*besides me.*

без*without*

Без усял*я*кай прыч*ы*ны.*Without any excuse.*

вакол*around*

Вак*о*л яг*о* сабр*а*ліся л*ю*дзі.*People gathered around him.*

воддаль*far from*

В*о*ддаль дар*о*гі ста*я*ла в*ё*ска.*Far from the road stood a village.*

да*until*

Яшч*э* н*е*калькі дзён да жнів*а*.*It is still a few days until
harvest.*

*to*

Дад*а*ць пяць да трох.*Add five to three.*

Уж*о* да б*е*рага падплыв*а*ў.*He had already swam to the bank.*

дзеля*for \[someone’s benefit\]*

**Зрабл*ю* г*э*та дз*е*ля цяб*е*.*I will do this for you.*

для*for*

Для яг*о* г*э*та л*ё*гкая спр*а*ва.It is an easy thing for him.

з*off of* (opposite of на + accusative)

* *Прыбр*а*ў ліст з акн*а*.*He removed the leaf off of thewindow.*

*out of *(opposite of у + accusative)

В*ы*йшаў з вад*ы*.*He got out of the water.*

зам*е*ст*instead*

Х*о*чаш вад*ы* зам*е*ст ч*а*ю?*Do you want water instead of tea?*

звыш*more than*

Набр*а*ў звыш двух дзес*я*ткаў.*He gathered more than twenty.*

кал*яnear*

**Др*э*ва расц*е* кал*я* пл*о*ту.*The tree grows near the fence.*

*about*

Кал*я* пяц*і* гадз*і*н.*About five o’clock.*

ля*near*

**Ён там ля лазьні блізка жыў.*He lived there, close near the bath-*

> house.

між*among*

Спр*э*чка між с*я*браў.*An arguement among friends.*

пав*о*дле*in accordance with*

Апран*у*тая пав*о*дле ап*о*шняй*Dressed according to the latest*

м*о*ды.*fashions.*

пам*і*ж*between*

Ста*я*ць пам*і*ж двух агн*е*й.*To stand between two fires.*

пасл*яafter*

Пасл*я* аб'ядн*а*ння, ян*ыAfter the unification, they selected*

в*ы*бралі стар*э*йшага.*an elder.*

**Наст*а*ўніца, як*а*я пры*е*дзе*The teacher, which will come after*

пасл*я* вуч*ы*лішча.*the school.*

с*у*праць*across*

Х*а*та ста*і*ць с*у*праць шк*о*лы.*The house is across from the school.*

*against*

Плысц*і* с*у*праць цяч*э*ння.*To swim against the current.*

Хто «за» і хто «с*у*праць»?*Who is “for” and who is “against”?* 

Здар*ы*лася с*у*праць ма*ё*й*It happened against my will.*

в*о*лі.

сяр*о*д*in the middle of*

Др*э*ва ста*і*ць сяр*о*д п*о*ля.*A tree stands in the middle of a*

field.

у\[used to show possession\]

Няўж*о* ў іх ням*а* саб*а*кі?*Do they really not have a dog?*

У яг*о* бал*і*ць галав*а*.*His head hurts.*

*at*

Шыць паліт*о* ў краўц*а*.*To have the coat mended at the*

tailor’s.

##### Chapter 25

# The Instrumental Case

25.1Use of the instrumental case

This case is used by certain prepositions and also to signify that the
noun functions as some means for an action. The direct object of some
verbs, especially those that translate as *to be*, also takes this case.
A word in the instrumental case can often be translated into English by
preceding it with the preposition “with.”

Гал*о*ўнай іх с*і*лай был*і *гран*а*ты.*Their main weapon was grenades.*

Мы дав*а*й па*е*дзем маш*і*най.*Let’s take the car.*

Ты пав*і*нна вал*о*даць г*э*тай м*о*вай*You should have such control of
this*

так, каб ч*у*лася як уд*о*ма*language that you feel at home*

між людз*е*й, як*і*я*among people, who speak Belarusian.*

па-белар*у*ску гав*о*раць.

25.2Prepositions with the instrumental case

The following prepositions can be followed by the instrumental case. The
meaning of each preposition in that context is given.

з*with*

Я пайш*о*ў з *і*мі.*I went with them.*

за*behind*

Ідз*і* за мн*о*ю.*Walk behind me.*

між*between*

Дар*о*га ў*е*цца між пал*я*мі.*The road winds between fields.*

над*over*

Над л*е*сам нав*і*сла хм*а*ра.*A stormcloud hung over the forest.*

*exceeding*

Мар*о*з над ус*і*мі мараз*а*мі.*A frost exceeding all frosts.*

пад*beneath*

**Жыт*а* зал*о*ціцца пад с*о*нцам.*The rye ripened beneath the sun.*

*under*

Быць пад стр*о*гай ах*о*вай.*To be under heavy guard.*

пам*і*ж*between*

Пам*і*ж н*е*бам і зямл*ё*ю.*Between heaven and earth.*

п*е*рад*in front of*

Не адступ*а*ць п*е*рад*Do not retreat in the face of*

ц*я*жкасцямі.*difficulty.*

*before*

П*е*рад тым, тр*э*ба пад*у*маць.*Before that, one must think.*

*compared to*

Ян*ы* нішт*о* п*е*рад ім.*They are nothing compared to him.*
